docs(developer): keyboard submission and design principles (#1241)
keymanapp/help.keyman.com: developer/keyboards/standard/index.md

---
title: Keyboard Design Principles
---

## Introduction

> Making the first keyboard can be excitingly overwhelming at first. We

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Making the first keyboard can be overwhelming at first. We

```

> hope this method will enlighten your idea of keyboard design; from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
hope this method will improve your process for keyboard design; from

```

### I: Intuition

We must not forget to associate the product with feelings. It is important to think of the user experience when developing a keyboard, as it can play a huge role in how much users engage with the product. For examples:

-   Double-space to insert a space

    It might look fancy and unique, but if the language uses space frequently, then this design may be annoying to the users.

-   Double-space signifies end of sentence and inserts a fullstop automatically

    This is a known feature of most built-in keyboards, and it sounds good enough for practical use.

-   Type
    <kbd>e</kbd>+<kbd>e</kbd>+<kbd>;</kbd>
    to get <kbd>ëë</kbd> instead of typing
    <kbd>e</kbd>+<kbd>;</kbd>+<kbd>e</kbd>+<kbd>;</kbd>

    Both techniques are correct, and it is up to you to decide which one is more suited for the language.

### S: Simplicity

It is already overwhelming enough to get started with a new keyboard, so we should look for a way to encourage users to keep using it by making it simple and solve issues. You should raise some questions as such:

> -   **Should some characters be ommited?**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Should some characters be omitted?**  

```

    Be mindful of every character you add to your keyboard. The temptation to include lots of extra characters does sound beneficial, but it might not help as much. Overall, don't overload keys with too many variants.

> -   **Who is your target Users?**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **Who are your target users?**  

```

    Does one keyboard need two languages?

    Is the keyboard mainly used for mathematics and physics?

    Will it be a specialized keyboard for specialized users?

    How exactly do the Modifier keys work on the keyboard?

-   **Which technical details can you hide from Users?**  

    Have you considered implementing one output for different ways of typing? For example:

    1.  <kbd>a</kbd>+<kbd>\`</kbd>=<kbd>à</kbd>
    2.  <kbd>\`</kbd>+<kbd>a</kbd>=<kbd>à</kbd>

>     It helps to simplify the typing experience if users unintentionally type one of the sequences or if it is a habitual choice. All of the hassle would be handled without users knowing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Whether these patterns arise because of user preferences or due to accidentally-reordering keystrokes, supporting both can simplify the typing experience for users.
```

> -   **If typing mistake happens, is there a automatic way to correct it?**  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   **If a typing mistake happens, is there a automatic way to correct it?**  

```

>     Similarly, some languages have different inputs for one word, but it wasn't until we started to automate correcting these mistakes on the latest keyboards that it was possible to get one correct encoded word from many ways of typing. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Similarly, some languages support different inputs for one word.  It's possible to add rules to automate correcting these mistakes, resulting in one correct encoded word regardless of the way it is typed. For example:
```

    1.  <kbd>ប</kbd>+<kbd>
        េ</kbd>+<kbd>ី</kbd>
    2.  <kbd>ប</kbd>+<kbd>
        ី</kbd>+<kbd> េ</kbd>
    3.  <kbd>ប</kbd>+<kbd> េី</kbd>

    Can you guess how many sequences are wrong? Instead of having users manually re-type the whole thing, we can implement changes where we see these behaviors.

### C: Consistency

> The importance of knowing the language for the keyboard is a massive contributor to a quality keyboard. You should consider the rules for writing the language and the structure of the script. If cohesion is what you seek, then be sure to use the questions below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fluency in the language for the keyboard yields many insights for designing a quality keyboard. You should consider the rules for writing the language and the structure of the script. If cohesion is what you seek, then be sure to use the questions below:

```

-   Is alphabetic order sensible? How about grouping by sound?
-   Which letters are rare?
-   How do I associate rare letters on the keyboard?
-   What are the common sequences and pairs?

### U: Usability

Now, great design should be applauded, but how can you tell the functionality of the design without testing it? Find out which alternative helps improve users' daily usage. Keep in mind:

-   Who are your target users?
-   How would experienced or novice users feel about this?
-   How would native or non-native speakers feel about this?

### S: Standard

You have to consider these factors if you want to follow our standard when developing keyboards:

-   Font

    We only accept Unicode-based keyboards.

-   Layout

    Plan ahead: which devices does the keyboard support?

-   Legislated and Societal requirements
    1.  Accessibility laws

    2.  Mandated characters or symbols:

        e.g. currency symbols...

    3.  License terms

        To distribute to our keyboard's repository, we suggest using an open license.

    4.  Consistency with majority languages or layouts

-   Folder Structure

>     It is ideal to start with a new folder. If you are looking to publish the keyboard, then we suggest using the folder structure provided [here](https://help.keyman.com/developer/keyboards/advanced/).

Reviewer 2: Can a relative link work, like?

```suggestion
It is ideal to start with a new folder. If you are looking to publish the keyboard, then we suggest using the folder structure provided [here](../advanced/).
```

Author: Yes! That works.
